There was a question about having a kidney problem that I did not have.
It developed, but the Army didn't think so.
And because of my eyes and that, I was 4F.
And in med school, this is sort of unrelated to A&M, but I joined the Naval Reserve and applied for an active duty at the end of the time in med school and failed their physical again.
And so when I was an intern,
I then applied for the Army.
And so I was taken to a room and told to take my shirt off, and I sat on the examining table.
And the doctor walked in, and that time I had my degree to be an intern.
So he said, oh, you're a doctor.
I said, yes.
He said, is there anything wrong with you?
I said, no.
He said, put your shirt back on.
So I became an Army doctor.
Let's see.
So you didn't go through final review, and... I can remember the final review when I was a freshman, because we stood at attention some time.
The unit's all masked, you know.
And I can remember the big guys in my unit fainted.
Because when you stand rigidly for so long, something happens to your vasculature.
And it was the big guys who fainted.
Now, wasn't it about your freshman year or so that Eisenhower came to the campus?
Yes.
I think it was 1947 for graduation, I believe, or something.
I know he spoke, I think it was graduation, or it may have been the induction of a new president or something.
What impression did that make on a young undergraduate?
Well, he was in summer uniform.
I remember that.
a handsome military officer.
And it was, yes, it was impressive.
Was anything made of the fact that he was a native-born Texan?
I don't know that too much was made of that fact because as a, having grown up in Kansas, he more or less said he was from Kansas, you know.
So I don't know that that was overemphasized to his face.
He was teaching in Denison in 1952-53, the year he's elected, and according to the story we heard there,
that he didn't know he had actually been born in Denison, that he had thought he'd been born in Tyler.
But his older brother Milton said, no, you were born there and we moved to Tyler about a few weeks later.
So that probably was on his records that he was born in Tyler, I guess.
Let's see.
Silver Taps.
Yes, a young man, last name B-R-E-D-T, died in an auto accident when I was a member of my unit.
And I remember that very well.
We formed more or less, I guess, in front of Lawrence Sullivan Ross's statue, or adjacent to it.
And it was an evening, sort of cold.
The dark and silver taps and so forth, yeah.
And did the buglers come out on the pile?
I think so.
I remember the bugle more than the location of the bugler.
Did, were you, as a fish, were you part of a polishing crew on the statue?
I didn't have that honor.
In fact, I've, of course, living here, I've been seeing the statue many times, but I think it's better polished in the last 20 years than it was back in New Orleans.
Five years, too.
In fact, some of these traditions you hear about were, as E. E. McQuillan, who had the former students said, a tradition is something that has occurred for four years, you know?
Now, Mr. Rudder, I remember him chuckling about Prexy's Moon.
Yeah.
That light bulb that used to be a, and that, and when he was an undergraduate, it was.
They'd shoot it.
Yeah, when there was a commandant, they would shoot it too.
Is that right?
Yeah.
Was it being done when you were in the Corps?
I think at that point, that had, I think the war changed things enough so that I don't remember people, that didn't fade it out by then.
Was muster held, do you remember muster in those days?
Yes.
Where was it held?
Yeah, I'm trying to think.
I think it was in the stadium, I believe, yeah.
But it was held, yes.
What did those muster?
You know, one thing, as a student, that's more a former student function, and we were aware of that more than, but not so much as a student, yeah.
What role do those events play, muster and silver taps and bonfire and so forth, play in creating Aggie spirit?
I think the bonfire and silver taps, I think they both had an yell practice too.
They really made you feel part of the A&M family.
And not everything was just a lot of fun.
I mean, you know, if you're at Yale practice and you're a freshman, somebody's over six inches from your ear yelling, yell louder.
I mean, at the time, that's not, but in retrospect, it sort of is special.
And I can remember Bill Eccles and I were detailed in our whole outfit.
if matter, to guard the bonfire.
And our duty was sort of from midnight till six in the morning or something.
And then it was, you know, horrible weather.
You know, cold and windy and wet and everything.
And one of us had a raincoat, the other had a poncho, and so we put the poncho, or maybe the raincoat down, and then the poncho sort of over us.
And one of us would sleep while the other, we were theoretically watching out for University of Texas marauders, but the one who was awake would be watching to see if the upperclassmen were coming around to check us.
And then he would wake the one who was asleep, wake up the one who was asleep, you know, and then both of us would look alert, you know.
But I mean, things like that.
And I can remember we had to guard the stadium once.
Apparently Rice had threatened to come up and throw some paint on it or something.
And I recall that I decided that, being a freshman, I don't know how I had any decision to make.
But anyway, I got the press box.
And the press box was not as it is today.
It was open.
But it was about the safest place in the stadium, I'd say.
But I could, I guess, see things better than everybody else.
Aggie ring, do you remember that being a special thing?
Oh yes, everybody got an Aggie ring.
Now you notice I don't have one on.
My ring went to the bottom, fell off in the Gulf of Mexico.
The rings were, I got the biggest kind.
It was heavy enough so when your hand was wet with water or soap, particularly soap, it could slip off in the shower or something.
Unfortunately, one time it slipped off when I was swimming in the Gulf when I was in med school.
As a physician, before each operation or delivery or even just your office, you're always washing your hands and particularly in surgery.
you have to take your rings off, or your ring off, as well as your watch.
And so at that point, when I lost that, I didn't get another one.
And after the watch I had stopped working, I never wore a wrist watch after that.
Really?
Bonfire.
Where was Bonfire held in your student days?
The bonfire was held on what is called Simpson Field.
On the drill field.
Uh-huh, yeah.
And the drill field west of, north of where the Memorial Student Center is today.
What did, what was put into it?
What were the, what was burned up?
mainly trees, tree trunks.
My father, that was one of the things that actually he had something to do with changing.
In the early 1930s, the bonfire consisted of anything anybody could find, which meant
woodsheds and outhouses and that era of that sort of plumbing, and our fence on, you know, faculty members' fence or something.
And because the kids didn't have transportation the way they do now, and the bonfire was much smaller than it is.
So you're saying in the mid-30s that shift
Yes, and so I can remember going out to a log cabin which was catty-cornered across the street from the southeast part of the campus, where now Texas Avenue and George Bush Boulevard intersect.
And at the part catty-cornered across the street from the campus, there was a log cabin.
I remember that.
And the dad being the commandant was, of course, called on when somebody was irate about the students.
And the guy had walked over and had removed his outhouse.
And he got his outhouse back before the fire burned it up.
But everything was just fair game as far as that goes.
And so what dad did, he...
Some of the land west of the campus, on the west campus, more or less where the George Bush Library is now, and back toward the Penberthy mural area, some of that land needed to be cleared for agricultural reasons.
So he arranged for the students to have the right to cut the timber.
By hand?
I'm sure.
I imagine so.
Anyway, they sort of indicated you would not steal somebody's personal property anymore, but they gave them something to replace it with.
One of the interesting things is that after I came back here to practice, which was 1964,
That fall, before our house was built, we were living in mother and dad's house, and they were out at their place at Camp Crete.
A telephone call came from one of the older people in Bryan, two sisters, major landowners.
And they thought I was Dad, so they said, Colonel Anderson, if you'd like to have the students come out to one of our places to cut timber, we'd like for you to have them come out.
This was 1964.
Dad had stepped down his commandant in 1937.
But anyway.
Other people off campus began to make available trees and so forth.
I guess some foreign transportation became available.
So anyway, it shifted from being sort of personal property to timber.
Did you know of any student fraternities, secret fraternities in existence at that point?
There was one I think called True Texans or something, and maybe another.
But I was not a member of that.
What did they, what was their goal?
What was their purpose?
I only know second-hand, but I have the impression they wanted to maintain the traditions of the past, basically.
But beyond that, I don't know too much.
As far as I'm aware, that they hope to elect their members to keep things going in a certain direction, like you're saying, to uphold the tradition.
Now, the Ross Volunteers were, you know, a known organization, and I'm sure that a lot of them were members of that.
And that was basically, as you know better probably than I, served in various sort of formal capacities and associated with events and so on.
Was there a formal pre-med organization?
When I was a student, yes, there was.
Who was its advisor?
Dr. Gravett?
Dr. Well, Dr. Potter was.
Oh, okay.
When I was a student, then as he became less healthy and retired, then Dr. Gravett was that, and he was that for, I'm sure, at least 20 years.
What was A&M's reputation in those days for getting students into medical school?
It was excellent.
Now, there were not a lot of premeds at A&M, but there were really two reasons for that.
One was that the emphasis of A&M was so much in other directions, but the other was that
that not many people got past the sophomore year of pre-med through Dr. Potter's course.
And if they did, they almost uniformly got in medical school.
Now, let's see.
In those days, the only medical schools in the state were in Galveston and Baylor in Houston.
And Southwestern in Dallas.
Oh, I forgot Southwestern.
Three.
And did any of the three have any particular higher prestige?
I don't know that any had higher prestige.
Now, two were state schools and one was private, and Baylor had the smallest enrollment, and probably for that reason it was thought of well for the University of Texas in Galveston, of course, was the oldest school and had a lot of tradition behind it.
and did take in a larger class.
And we're talking about 100, when I entered, they took in 164.
And apparently the year before it was 132, and the legislature required them to go up to 64.
The faculty didn't like it, and they conditioned or failed 25 students.
Oh, my.
And luckily I was not one of them, but a lot of those kids had to go back to pre-med another year or repeat the year and take summer school.
But the point is that Baylor probably had maybe 100 students at that time or 90 or something, and I imagine Southwestern was sort of in between.
When I was an undergraduate, we didn't calculate our grade point ratio.
the meticulous way they do now.
Did you and your friends talk about a 3.2 and a 3?
Yeah, we were very conscious of our grade point ratios.
Now, it was based on a 3 schedule rather than a 4.
Oh, that's right.
That's right.
So, for example, to be a distinguished student, you had to have 2.25, which would be 3.25 now.
About what did it take, you assumed,
to get into medical school?
I think it took at least two hours then, three hours then.
And I don't think people did not make as uniformly higher grades
as they do now, and I don't know if the kids are better prepared out of high school or if the grading system is a little different, but really, you know, if you took Dr. Potter's course, if you got a B minus, that was a triumph, meaning a lot of guys got C's who did get to med school maybe, but by the skin of their teeth.
I think people failed more than they do now.
I mean, and the faculty didn't, you know, I've talked to people in med school now, and, you know, they think of all the legal problems of failing somebody, and gosh, people just fail things in those years or made C's or D's, you know, in some cases.
All right, I've got only three or four more questions.
So when I say, I would say probably
If you had a 3.3 average of the present scale, you could get in medical school pretty assuredly.
If you had below that, you might get in and you might not.
And often the med schools would have one position to open at the last minute because somebody went to another school.
And if you were there at the front door and had a 2.1
I've got only three or four more questions for you about your own career, but let's go back and talk about your dad after he comes back.
He comes back as track coach.
Well, he came back in the physical education department.
Oh, okay.
Yeah.
And then becomes head track coach.
And then Homer Norton asked him.
Dad had been back maybe a year or something.
And Horton came over and said, you've been a coach, and wouldn't you rather go back to coaching?
And that I'd like for you to be a tri-coach.
And so that dad did go back to coaching then.
Do you have any idea what the salary was he started coaching?
Oh, it would be minimal compared to now.
I know it would be.
his salary was ever over, and this is toward when he retired, about $7,500.
And I'm sure that when he went back to the job, it probably was like $4,500 or something like that.
I've heard through gossip that Tom Harrington never made $25,000.
I don't doubt it, yeah.
I think Dr. Walton's salary got up to about $10,000 or something like that.
When he becomes track coach then in what year?
Forty?
Forty-six.
What do you think were his greatest
proudest accomplishments as a track coach?
Well, I think Dad, from his viewpoint, felt that he helped to bring along a lot of athletes who were not fully developed or highly developed in high school into
college level performers.
And I know in maybe the first four or five years that he coached that he had
as many boys on his team who were Southwest Conference champions who had not been state interscholastic champions as the rest of the teams were together.
And I think that was a reflection of really having the ability to see ability before it was actual, in a potential, in other words, ability.
At the other end of the scale, he had the first Southwest Conference athlete to win an Olympic gold medal in a relay event on his team.
Arthur Herndon was a member of the 1600 meter relay team at the London Olympics in 1948.
And then four years later, he had the first Southwest Conference athlete to win an individual gold medal.
Buddy Davis.
And I think that was... Was that Buddy Davis?
Buddy Davis, yeah.
From Niederland.
Uh-huh.
And Buddy, of course, was not a developed high jumper when he came here.
I think he'd been to the regional meet or something and scissored six feet or six foot one or something.
And, of course, he was six feet eight inches tall.
And his biggest problem was he got all of his appendages together so that something didn't hit the bar.
Because he could get the height.
What were your, what do you think, did your dad have a favorite event?
A favorite race or jump?
Well, if you were talking about the running events, I think his favorite events, his favorite event would have been the low hurdles.
And what he did there was often to convert a sprinter who was very good, but not quite a champion, convert him into a hurdler.
And he had a great deal of success in the hurdles for that reason.
Because over the years, A&M had very good 40 quarter-milers.
And I must say that Ray Putnam,
an economics professor and a former NCAA mile champion, did a lot of the coaching of the circle events, including the 440.
And so in that second period, he had a great deal to do with the success of the boys.
But A&M had wonderful mile relay teams and a series of Southwest Conference 440 champions.
And my dad had, I know, one series of three-quarter mile champions
one after the other, and one of whom set the record and ran the quarter mile under 50 seconds for the first time in the 1920s.
He ran a 49-1.
Did he have an event that was at the other end of the scale that was his least favorite?
Well let me talk about the field.
Oh, I'm sorry.
He had a great deal of success with the shot put.
And secondarily, the discus.
And also Javelin, mainly in the first years of his coaching in Javelin.
But in some particular, A&M had NCAA-quality boys.
And of course, Darrell Hooper won the shot put one of his years, second in the Olympics.
In fact, in the 1952 Olympics, Dara and Buddy Davis together, if you had scored up scores for colleges, were I think second to USC and tied with Oxford or something internationally in the Olympics.
I think Oxford had a very fine miler at that time and one or two distance men.
Going back to the least favorite events, I don't know if they were necessarily least favorite.
Or most frustrating to them.
In fact, he actually solely coached cross-country for many years.
Dad was a sprinter, long jumper, broad jumper, in other words, and pole vaulter as an athlete.
And so he had some interest in those areas.
I think, frankly, though, he lost interest in the sprints
at least 100 in particular, because I think he felt that as time went on, he had a record holder in the sprints, the first guy to run it under 10 seconds, the conference meeting, for example, in the 1920s, and had some good, good spreaders.
But he did not actively recruit spreaders probably in the last seven years that he was coaching, maybe the last 10.
And because he really felt that
That was an event where you could do it or you couldn't do it.
It didn't require a lot of coaching.
We were not the most attractive recruiting school in the world at that time.
He felt really he could not compete with some other school on recruiting the sprinters, so he more or less just left that to other teams.
Even the second time he coached one golfers champion.
The young man was lucky to win the championship because it was an off year, so to speak.
But he did not push the sprints a lot, I guess.
And probably in his early years, he was learning a lot about distance running, since he was not a distance runner.
And that's something he had to learn over a period of time.
But I don't think he really had any super negative feelings toward any of it.
Right now, I'm not going to ask the negative on this one.
Which coaches at other schools did he most respect?
Well, I think he respected, well, of course, the two people he competed with for the most years were Clyde Littlefield, who had a remarkable record at Texas, and Emmett Brunson, who had a more meteoric record at Rice.
I think he liked both of them.
And he very much wanted to beat Texas.
I mean, that was, and I'm sure Texas very much wanted to beat us because we were Texas as a total athletic, intercollegiate athletic.
was the outstanding, dominated sports to a great extent.
And NM could be competitive with Texas in track and in baseball
and except for in the first 50 years of dad's coaching in football too, but not the second.
I think A&M had the best record against Texas.
A&M track had the best record against Texas track.
in any other sport in the long run.
But they were fierce competitors.
I mean, but they liked each other.
And Emmett Rudson at Rice, who had been a Southwest Conference mile record holder, was an extremely competitive person.
And they used to call him the angry Irishman.
But Dad got along well with him, too.
But obviously, the University of Texas in the long run, you had to respect them and what they did, because they were consistently good.
If I could chat with your dad right now, do you think I could get from him a response about which of his track performers made him the most proud?
Were there some that came, you know, from nowhere to somewhere?
Mickey Herskowitz, who was a Cub reporter, came up and interviewed Dad when he retired.
Dad said, he was asked a question of something of that nature.
He said, somewhere between Walter Davis on the winter stand of the Olympics and Jerry Bunnen on his knees at the finish of the two-mile.
Jerry Bunnen was a fellow who went to Consolidated.
was a two-mounter in college, and Jerry had a lot of intestinal fortitude and enough ability to place in meets, but was not a champion.
And in the 1947 conference meet,
The meat was going down to the last event, as to who was going to win.
And the two mile was one of the, something like the next to last, or two or three for the last.
Very close to the end.
And every point was, you know, important.
And Jerry came off the final turn and hit the curb and fell.
And really just sure guts brought him in.
There's a photo of him in one of the annuals, and it shows him about four yards from the finish line.
And he looked like a kyphotic guy who was about four feet tall.
He could not even stand up.
I mean, he was crunchy.
But he got across the line.
Oh, that's good.
That's good.
All right, let's go back then to you.
You knew what you were going to do the year after commencement, so it wasn't to get a job.
You were going to medical school.
How well prepared did you think you were for medical school?
Well, I didn't know.